---
categories: ['Leadership']
date: "2022-03-16T00:00:00Z"
title: The CTO trap
---

Walking the thin line between being an executive, tech lead and human being in a company.
<!--more-->

## Establishing the Foundation
As a Chief Technology Officer (CTO), the very essence of your role is encapsulated in the "Technology" that graces your title. A genuine passion for technology courses through your veins, driving you to explore its depths, stay abreast of cutting-edge advancements, and master the intricacies spanning hardware to software, IaaS/PaaS, architectures, and testing methodologies. The allure of solving complex problems consumes your hours, and in the quiet corners of your mind, there is a tinge of envy for your engineering counterparts who incessantly revel in this pursuit.
For those who resonate with this sentiment, the innate desire emerges to transcend the confines of individual features or products. It's a yearning to leverage this technological insight to craft something more profound – the molding of an entire company. Every CEO or Managing Director welcomes the presence of an individual adept at navigating the enigmatic realm of technology, who not only unravels the mysteries of the proverbial black box but also comprehends the nuanced challenges inherent in steering the ship of business.

## Navigating the Dilemma
Yet, being a CTO encompasses more than an intimate understanding of technology. In this multifaceted role, you transcend being merely a manager, mentor, or leader – you become the helmsman steering the company's course. The individuals you bring on board have the potential to shape the company's culture, and it's crucial to acknowledge that culture is cultivated from the bottom up, not imposed from the top down. How you interact with your team profoundly influences the technological success of the company, determining whether your team remains content, motivated, and committed.
And that's merely the human aspect of your responsibilities. Layer on the strategic decisions concerning technologies, processes, and partnerships, and you find the weight of the entire company nearly resting solely on your shoulders. It's an evident truth: your actions wield the power to define not only the company's fate but also the experiences of its employees.
Now, let's engage in an honest appraisal. How many individuals do you know who possess a profound understanding of technology and can guide and structure complex technological challenges for both business professionals and developers alike? Who can adeptly shape teams, recruit skilled individuals, and swiftly and efficiently facilitate seamless onboarding? Individuals who can make technology decisions with implementation speed, future-proofing, and risk-agnostic considerations at the forefront.
Moreover, the paradox emerges – the CTO often leads a company not in technological aspects but in people management and strategic thinking. At times, it may feel like everything is spiraling out of control due to the sheer breadth of responsibilities that come with the position.
This predicament is what I term "the CTO trap" – the relentless demand to juggle an array of responsibilities inherent in the role. However, let's face the reality – no person can seamlessly fulfill all these responsibilities.

## The Liberation
Now, bearing this weight on your shoulders, how does one navigate this intricate dilemma? My passion lies in constructing tech products that genuinely enhance people's lives. However, there's a breaking point, and it lies in CEOs harboring the belief that a CTO can single-handedly save and steer their company. The escape from this trap involves a recalibration – acknowledging the limitations, delegating effectively, and fostering collaboration across leadership roles to propel the company forward.

1. **Commence with Self-Leadership and Embrace the Wider Perspective.** Embarking on the journey to build something extraordinary necessitates a profound realization – success extends beyond technology. While coding may represent the more straightforward aspect of this endeavor, the overarching vision demands a broader perspective. If your CEO envisions you as the company's savior, embrace the challenge. Echoing the wisdom of Peter Drucker, "Leadership is about doing the right thing." Understanding that the 'C' in your CTO title signifies "company" is paramount. This realization places the onus squarely on your shoulders, and rightly so – as an executive, you wield influence not just over technology but the entire organizational landscape. Reject the victim's role; instead, adopt a driver's mindset in charting the course for success. Recognize that the company's success relies on your ability to navigate the intricacies of technology and the broader challenges of leadership and business strategy. Seizing the executive role involves transcending the confines of coding to orchestrate a symphony of success where every note resonates with the harmonious progression of the entire company.

2. **Build an Exceptional Team.** Collaboration makes everything more manageable; the most extraordinary results stem from a collective effort. While you may excel in certain areas, genuine success requires a team. Assembling a group of skilled, motivated individuals and fostering collaboration and efficiency among them is akin to witnessing a miraculous process. It parallels the development of a baby in its mother's womb, evolving into the ideal combination envisioned by its creator. Just like a child's growth, team development is a journey filled with experiments, learning experiences, and occasional setbacks. Success is never guaranteed, and failure is not uncommon. However, the impact of a successful outcome is so profound that the endeavor is always worthwhile. People are the linchpin of a great team. Begin by selecting individuals you enjoy working with and cultivating small groups around them. The initial focus should not solely be on the technical skills these early "seeds" bring but on their ability to lead, guide, and mentor others. It is crucial to identify individuals who align with your work philosophy and can propagate your approach to collaboration within their teams. Cultivate individuals who are solid multipliers of your leadership qualities – construct your rat pack!

3. **Understand the Consequences of Your Choices!** Strategic decisions hold a special place in my preferences. While they lack the immediacy of operational choices, their significance lies in the profound impact they can make. The results of a strategic decision may unfold over weeks, months, or even years. Whether it involves entering a new market, introducing an additional feature to a product, or adopting a new database technology, the eventual outcome can save your resources, enhance profitability, or outmaneuver competitors. Crafting strategic decisions poses a challenge, as alternative options may appear more accessible, quicker, or cost-effective. However, "strategic" emphasizes their role in positioning your company and product in the market. Merely aligning with the competition and relying on their missteps is insufficient; you must stay ahead and gain a competitive edge. These decisions demand foresight, anticipating the market's future direction, amplifying their substantial impact. While numerous books delve into the art of making strategic decisions, I won't delve into those details here. The key is acknowledging your decision's inherent nature and its far-reaching consequences.

4. **Follow Your Passion!** The irresistible desire to unravel the inner workings of various systems has been a driving force throughout my journey – from exploring games to navigating complex business systems and delving into virtualization. Every CTO reflects on the catalyst that propelled them into the tech sphere. The enduring curiosity and passion for utilizing bits and bytes to craft products for real-world use are foundational. The fascination with technology persists despite the awareness that there are always more proficient developers, architects, and SREs. Grateful for the enduring reliability of compilers, which operate much like they did two decades ago, I dedicate time each week to indulge in this passion. Whether engaging in pair programming sessions with developers (often more for their amusement than mine) or delving into script hacking, this deliberate commitment ensures I stay grounded and connected to the core of the technology.

## Observe - Experiment - Iterate
Leadership is undeniably challenging, but as the adage goes, "If it hurts, do it more often." Take a dedicated moment each week for self-reflection and ponder a few straightforward queries:
Can you effectively guide the company's technical trajectory, or do you feel trapped amid the CEO, customers, and shareholders?
What viable options are available, and how might they prove beneficial?
Is it possible to reclaim the helm, steering the company towards evolution?
Whom can you engage in discussion to gain a fresh perspective?
This process revolves around consistent and incremental enhancement – the same ethos we instill in our teams. Leading by example and continuous improvement should be a personal commitment. Undoubtedly, you will encounter challenges repeatedly, but your escape plan lies directly before you.

## Embrace the Journey
The life of a CTO is an ongoing journey of challenges, triumphs, downfalls,  and continuous growth. Recognizing and addressing the "CTO trap" is the first step towards creating a fulfilling and successful career in technology leadership. Here are some additional insights to navigate this intricate path:

5. **Foster a Learning Culture**
Embrace the fact that technology is ever-evolving. Encourage a learning culture within your team and across the company. Invest in continuous training, provide resources, and create an environment where everyone feels empowered to stay updated on the latest industry trends. This keeps your team sharp and fosters a dynamic atmosphere that aligns with the fast-paced nature of the tech world.

6. **Balance Short-Term and Long-Term Goals**
Striking the right balance between short-term goals (such as meeting project deadlines) and long-term vision (like anticipating industry shifts) is crucial. Getting caught up in day-to-day operations is easy, but always watch the bigger picture. This duality requires a delicate touch – ensuring immediate tasks are handled efficiently while making decisions contributing to the company's future success.

7. **Communication is Key**
As a CTO, your ability to communicate effectively is paramount. Translate complex technical jargon into language understandable by non-technical stakeholders. Regularly update the leadership team on technological advancements and their potential impacts. Clear communication builds trust and ensures that everyone in the company is on the same page regarding the company's technological direction.

8. **Embrace Innovation**
Innovation is at the core of technology. Encourage a culture where creativity and innovation thrive. This doesn't necessarily mean groundbreaking inventions daily but fostering an environment where team members feel empowered to suggest improvements and try new ideas. Innovations, big or small, contribute to the company's overall progress.

9. **Prioritize Your Well-being**
The pressures of a CTO role can be intense, often leading to burnout. Prioritize your well-being by setting realistic expectations for yourself and your team. Delegate responsibilities, learn to say no when necessary, and make time for activities outside of work that rejuvenate you. A healthy and balanced leader can make better decisions and effectively guide the team.

10. **Celebrate Achievements**
In the relentless pursuit of improvement, it's essential to celebrate big and small successes. Acknowledge your team's achievements, and take a moment to appreciate the progress made. Positive reinforcement boosts morale and reinforces the idea that hard work pays off.

## Conclusion
The role of a CTO is undeniably challenging, requiring a unique blend of technical prowess, leadership skills, and a strategic mindset. The "CTO trap" is a reality. Still, with the right attitude, a supportive team, and a commitment to continuous improvement, you can navigate the challenges and emerge as a successful technology leader. Embrace the journey, learn from each experience, and remember that the escape plan is always within reach.